Documentation on artifacts (#5989)
oscar-system/Oscar.jl: docs/src/DeveloperDocumentation/artifacts.md

```@meta
CurrentModule = Oscar
CollapsedDocStrings = true
DocTestSetup = Oscar.doctestsetup()
```

# Artifacts

This page explains what artifacts are, when to use them, and how to work with them in OSCAR.

## What Artifacts Are and When to Use Them

Artifacts are content-addressed data bundles managed by [Julia's artifact system](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/).

> They are declared in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` and are downloaded and unpacked on demand.

Reviewer: Slightly misleading: regular artifacts are downloaded and unpacked when Oscar is installed or updated (but only if they were not already installed).

There are also *lazy* artifacts which indeed are only downloaded&installed on demand.

Author: Pushed a change that (hopefully) carefully distinguishes lazy artifacts from (regular) artifacts.

Artifacts can be accessed via Julia's artifact system through the `artifact"..."` string macro.

For example:

```julia
using LazyArtifacts

model_data_path = artifact"FTM-1511-03209/1511-03209.mrdi"

model = load(model_data_path)
```

The string passed to `artifact"..."` is determined by the corresponding entry in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

In `Oscar.jl` source files, the artifact string macro is already available and `using LazyArtifacts` is typically not required.

## Updating Artifacts

### General Rules

Artifacts are immutable. Updating an artifact therefore requires:

- creating a new tarball,
- uploading it to a stable hosting location,
- recomputing the `sha256` and `git-tree-sha1`,
- updating the corresponding entry in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`,
- opening a pull request with these changes.

Once the pull request is merged, the updated artifact becomes available in OSCAR.

Updating an artifact on a hosting platform alone, for example by uploading a new version to Zenodo, is not sufficient. Any change to the artifact contents changes its hashes and therefore requires a corresponding update of `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

!!! warning

>     Do not modify, rename, or delete files that are already referenced by existing OSCAR releases.

Reviewer 2: I would go a step further and state that all files referenced from the OSCAR master branch should be kept indefinitely.

Author: Ok. Just pushed a proposal.

- generated data,
- large datasets,
- data not intended to be edited manually.

As a rule of thumb, data stored directly in the `Oscar.jl` repository should not exceed the size of typical source files (around 100 KB). Small examples, test inputs, and simple hand-written data should remain in the `Oscar.jl` repository.

## Creating, Hosting and Using Artifacts

This section describes how to create, host, register, and use artifacts in the `Oscar.jl` repository. The workflow typically proceeds as follows:

- [ ] [Serialize data](@ref data_preparation)
- [ ] [Upload the tarball to a stable hosting location](@ref artifact_hosting)
- [ ] [Add an entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` and open a pull request](@ref artifact_registration)
- [ ] [Use the artifact once the pull request has been merged](@ref artifact_usage)

We illustrate this workflow with an [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example).

### [End-to-End Example](@id end-to-end-artifact-example)

The following example illustrates the complete workflow for creating, registering, and using an artifact in `Oscar.jl`.

#### Create data

```julia
using Oscar

obj = ZZ(2)^10
```

#### Save data

> ```julia

Author: ```suggestion

Let us employ the `.mrdi` file format to serialize our data. (You may of course use the file format you prefer.)

```julia
```

- generated data,
- large datasets,
- data not intended to be edited manually.

As a rule of thumb, data stored directly in the `Oscar.jl` repository should not exceed the size of typical source files (around 100 KB). Small examples, test inputs, and simple hand-written data should remain in the `Oscar.jl` repository.

## Creating, Hosting and Using Artifacts

This section describes how to create, host, register, and use artifacts in the `Oscar.jl` repository. The workflow typically proceeds as follows:

- [ ] [Serialize data](@ref data_preparation)
- [ ] [Upload the tarball to a stable hosting location](@ref artifact_hosting)
- [ ] [Add an entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` and open a pull request](@ref artifact_registration)
- [ ] [Use the artifact once the pull request has been merged](@ref artifact_usage)

We illustrate this workflow with an [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example).

### [End-to-End Example](@id end-to-end-artifact-example)

The following example illustrates the complete workflow for creating, registering, and using an artifact in `Oscar.jl`.

#### Create data

```julia
using Oscar

obj = ZZ(2)^10
```

#### Save data

> Let us employ the `.mrdi` file format to serialize our data. (You may of course use the file format you prefer.)

Author: ```suggestion
Let us employ the  [`.mrdi` file format to serialize our data](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/). (You may of course use the file format you prefer.)
```

```

Then add this information, together with the host location, to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`. This very example, we host at [https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz](https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz). Then, the corresponding entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` takes the following form:

```toml
[MyExample]
git-tree-sha1 = "ff2f21e623a130f47116d847ae54fd55232b42c1"
lazy = true

    [[MyExample.download]]
    sha256 = "3bd5a20e84b2e579ecde7dc5d7d4606444daf08407eecc9d8e59be1e468ca5a1"
    url = "https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz"
```

You may of course replace `MyExample` in the above entry with any other string that you find descriptive.

#### Use the artifact

The artifact string macro is exported by `LazyArtifacts`. In a standalone Julia session, load it explicitly.

```julia
using LazyArtifacts

obj_path = artifact"MyExample/example.mrdi"

obj = load(obj_path)
```

In `Oscar.jl` source files, the artifact string macro is already available and `using LazyArtifacts` is typically not required.

### [Preparing Data (Serialization)](@id data_preparation)

> Creating artifacts requires that the corresponding data be serialized locally first. Details are provided in the [Serialization page](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/).

Author: ```suggestion
Creating artifacts requires that the corresponding data be serialized locally first. Details are provided in the [Serialization page](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/).

We recommend the use of the `.mrdi` file format for serialization. However, this is not a strict requirement and you may use any file format that you see fit.
```

```@meta
CurrentModule = Oscar
CollapsedDocStrings = true
DocTestSetup = Oscar.doctestsetup()
```

# Artifacts

This page explains what artifacts are, when to use them, and how to work with them in `Oscar.jl`.

## What Artifacts Are and When to Use Them

> Artifacts are content-addressed bundles managed by [Julia's artifact system](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/) and declared in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`. Artifacts are automatically downloaded, or updated when `Oscar.jl` is installed or updated, unless the required artifact is already present locally.

Reviewer: It is usual to give filenames relative to the repository root. Perhaps also stress `Artifacts.toml` is just a file. And I'd also avoid overly long lines.
```suggestion
Artifacts are content-addressed bundles managed by [Julia's artifact system](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/) and declared in the file `Artifacts.toml`.
Artifacts are automatically downloaded, or updated when `Oscar.jl` is installed or updated, unless the required artifact is already present locally.
```

If you are worried that the reader might look for `Artifacts.toml` in a different place, one could also insert specific wording: "the file Artifacts.toml in the root directory of the Oscar.jl git repository" or so. But it seems unnecessary to me?

> Julia also supports [lazy artifacts](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/LazyArtifacts/), which are installed only on demand. In the following, we ignore lazy artifacts.

Reviewer 3: `we shall ignore`

> Julia also supports [lazy artifacts](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/LazyArtifacts/), which are installed only on demand. In the following, we ignore lazy artifacts.

Author: ```suggestion
Julia also supports [lazy artifacts](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/LazyArtifacts/), which are installed only on demand. In the following, we shall ignore lazy artifacts.
```

> Julia also supports [lazy artifacts](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/LazyArtifacts/), which are installed only on demand. In the following, we shall ignore lazy artifacts.

Author: ```suggestion
Julia also supports [lazy artifacts](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/LazyArtifacts/), which are installed only on demand.
```

Artifacts allow to:

- keep the `Oscar.jl` repository small,
- distribute data reproducibly,
- avoid duplication of large files across versions.

Artifacts should be used for data that does not belong directly in the `Oscar.jl` repository, in particular:

- generated data,
- large datasets,
- data not intended to be edited manually.

As a rule of thumb, data stored directly in the `Oscar.jl` repository should not exceed the size of typical source files (around 100 KB). Small examples, test inputs, and simple hand-written data should remain in the `Oscar.jl` repository.

## Creating, Hosting and Using Artifacts

This section describes how to create, host, register, and use artifacts in the `Oscar.jl` repository. The workflow typically proceeds as follows:

> - [ ] [Serialize data](@ref data_preparation)

Reviewer 3: I suggest that the names of the bullet points here should be essentially the same as the names of the subsections in the illustrative example below (_e.g._ so that people who are not good at English can easily understand the correlation).

Author: Makes sense, I have just taken a stab at this and thereby, hopefully, resolved this issue.

> - [ ] [Hosting the Data (zip the data as tarball and upload it to a stable location)](@ref artifact_hosting)

Reviewer 3: I suggest rephrasing to something like:
```
pack the data into a gzip compressed tarball...
```
I was a bit puzzled by `zip the data as tarball`: should I use `zip` or `tar`?

Author: ```suggestion
- [ ] [Hosting the Data (pack the data into a `gzip` compressed tarball, and upload it to a stable location)](@ref artifact_hosting)
```

> - [ ] [Registering the Artifact (add an entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` and open a pull request)](@ref artifact_registration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] [Registering the Artifact (add an entry to Oscar's `Artifacts.toml` and open a pull request)](@ref artifact_registration)
```

- [ ] [Using the Artifact (once the pull request has been merged)](@ref artifact_usage)

We illustrate this workflow with an [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example).

### [End-to-End Example](@id end-to-end-artifact-example)

The following example illustrates the complete workflow for creating, registering, and using an artifact in `Oscar.jl`.

#### Serializing the Data

> Let us employ the [`.mrdi` file format to serialize our data](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/) to serlialize the number $2^{10}$. (You may of course use the file format of your choice.)

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
Let us employ the [`.mrdi` file format to serialize our data](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/) to serialize the number $2^{10}$. (You may of course use the file format of your choice.)
```
but I'd also rephrase a bit, and avoid overly long lines:
```suggestion
For this example we will use the [`.mrdi` file format to serialize our data](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/).
(You may of course use the file format of your choice.)
Here, the data is the number $2^{10}$.
```

using Oscar

obj = ZZ(2)^10
```

#### Save data

Let us employ the  [`.mrdi` file format to serialize our data](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/). (You may of course use the file format you prefer.)

```julia
save("example.mrdi", obj)
```

#### Pack into a tarball

> Create a compressed tarball, for example `example_data_v1.tar.gz`, containing the file `example.mrdi`.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps give a little more guidance: I suspect that many (potential) Oscar users have never used `tar` or `gzip`.   For instance: `tar czf example_data_v1.tgz  example.mrdi`.  Maybe `zip` could be suggested as an alternative (as it is likely better known to people with a Microsoft background)?
Perhaps also a brief comment as to why the name should contain `_v1`; this is _implicitly_ explained later.

Author: This text is meant to become part of the developer documentation, not for Oscar users, no? Is this level of detail needed? (E.g. suggestion zip as alternative.)

Reviewer 4: Agree with @HereAround. This is just for  developers who want to provide some data for Oscar. Also an artifact must be a tarball, which is explained in the artifact documentation, which we refer to in the beginning.

Reviewer 3: I mistakenly remembered seeing that a Julia artifact could also be a `zip` file.  Anyway, I'm happier that they require TGZ files -- I presume it also works with the `.tgz` suffix in place of `.tar.gz`.

>     Do not introduce an intermediate directory inside the tarball. If multiple files are included, place them directly in the archive.

Reviewer 3: Consider the following alternative wording:
```
All files in the tarball must reside in the top-level directory; the tarball must not contain any subdirectories.
```
The two following commands are essentially equivalent: `tar cf tarfile.tar  file1 file2` and `tar cf tarfile.tar  ./file1 ./file2`.  Must one use the first form when generating an artifact?  I presume one should not be silly and create the tarball like this `tar cf tarfile.tar  ././././file1  ././././././file2` though it might conceivably work all the same...

Author: ```suggestion
    For simplicity, do not introduce an intermediate directory inside the tarball: if multiple files are included, just place them directly in the top level of the archive.
```

>     Do not introduce an intermediate directory inside the tarball. If multiple files are included, place them directly in the archive.

Reviewer 2: Where does this restriction come from? The `Artifacts` stdlib can surely deal with directory structures inside artifacts...

Reviewer: Yeah, I was also wondering about that. I think it is not necessary; perhaps it is a "best practice" for some reason I don't see, but it is not a requirement, and in a basic guide, I'd not expect it.

Author: This came from my experience in creating artifacts. However, having no intermediate folder (or even folders) is likely not a requirement. I changed the wording by suggesting this for simplicity.

> We host this very example tarball at [https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example\_data\_v1.tar.gz](https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz). 

Reviewer 3: Maybe `very example` should be `very simple example`?

Reviewer: I think "very" alone was intentional, if a bit quaint. But I'd also prefer a different wording. Perhaps "specific" or "particular"?

Author: ```suggestion
We host this particular example tarball at [https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example\_data\_v1.tar.gz](https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz). 
```

> We host this very example tarball at [https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example\_data\_v1.tar.gz](https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz). 

Reviewer: This should be equivalent but less redundant:
```suggestion
We host this very example tarball at <https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz>. 
```

#### Registering the Artifact

> Register the artifact by adding an entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`; see also [Julia's artifact documentation](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/). The package [`ArtifactUtils.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaPackaging/ArtifactUtils.jl) can help automate parts of this workflow. The following text demonstrates the manual workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Register the artifact by adding an entry to `Artifacts.toml`; see also
[Julia's artifact documentation](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/).
The package [`ArtifactUtils.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaPackaging/ArtifactUtils.jl)
can help automate parts of this workflow. The following text demonstrates the
manual workflow.
```

Register the artifact by adding an entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`; see also [Julia's artifact documentation](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/). The package [`ArtifactUtils.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaPackaging/ArtifactUtils.jl) can help automate parts of this workflow. The following text demonstrates the manual workflow.

First, compute the `sha256` and the `git-tree-sha1`:

```julia
using Tar, Inflate, SHA

filename = "/absolute/path/to/example_data_v1.tar.gz"

println("sha256: ", bytes2hex(open(sha256, filename)))
println("git-tree-sha1: ", Tar.tree_hash(IOBuffer(inflate_gzip(filename))))
```

> Then add this information, together with the host location, to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`. This very example, we host at [https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz](https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz). Then, the corresponding entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` takes the following form:

Reviewer 3: Minor problem here: the underscores are interpreted as start-and-end of an _italic block._

Author: I added backslashes to take care of this.

> Then add this information, together with the host location, to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`. This very example, we host at [https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz](https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz). Then, the corresponding entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` takes the following form:

Author: ```suggestion
Then add this information, together with the host location, to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`. This very example, we host at [https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example\_data\_v1.tar.gz](https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz). Then, the corresponding entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` takes the following form:
```

> Then add this information, together with the host location, to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

Reviewer: I'll not mention all the places that use `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`

```toml
[MyExample]
git-tree-sha1 = "ff2f21e623a130f47116d847ae54fd55232b42c1"
lazy = true

>     [[MyExample.download]]

Reviewer 3: I presume it is important that the first part of `MyExample.download` match exactly the "title" of the section.  It seems like superfluous repetition, but is probably a "safety feature".

Author: Presumably it is as you said a "safety feature", but I am not sure.

> lazy = true

Reviewer 3: Earlier you did write that you would ignore lazy artifacts...

    sha256 = "3bd5a20e84b2e579ecde7dc5d7d4606444daf08407eecc9d8e59be1e468ca5a1"
    url = "https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz"
```

> You may of course replace `MyExample` in the above entry with any other string that you find descriptive.

Reviewer 3: Strictly, `of course` would normally be between commas.

> You may of course replace `MyExample` in the above entry with any other string that you find descriptive.

Author: ```suggestion
You may, of course, replace `MyExample` in the above entry with any other string that you find descriptive.
```

#### Use the artifact

The artifact string macro is exported by `LazyArtifacts`. In a standalone Julia session, load it explicitly.

```julia
using LazyArtifacts

> obj_path = artifact"MyExample/example.mrdi"

Reviewer 3: I would have expected `artifact"MyExample"`.  Perhaps explain what `/example.mrdi` does in this context?

Author: You could have many files in a single artifact. With `/example.mrdi` you tell exactly which file to load.

Maybe a framing issue? I assumed this is appropriate text for developers.

Reviewer 3: It might still be worth highlighting that the syntax selects just one file from potentially several in the artifact.

Author: Ok. I added a comment on this.

> The artifact string macro is exported by `LazyArtifacts`. In a standalone Julia session, load it explicitly.

Reviewer: Isn't it also exported by `Artifacts`? Why now suddenly "lazy" stuff after all?

Author: I just improved the sentence.

obj = load(obj_path)
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Note that an artifact may contain multiple files. We use `/example.mrdi` to specify exactly which file to load.
```

> Note that an artifact may contain multiple files. We use `/example.mrdi` to specify exactly which file to load.

Reviewer 3: I suggest rephrasing to something like:
```
We append `/example.mrdi` to the artifact name to specify which file in the artifact is to be loaded.

> Note that an artifact may contain multiple files. We use `/example.mrdi` to specify exactly which file to load.

Reviewer: But you are not using `\example.mrdi`, you are using `artifact"MyExample/example.mrdi"` .. ?!?

Author: Just improved the sentence.

> Note that an artifact may contain multiple files. We use `/example.mrdi` to specify exactly which file to load.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that an artifact may contain multiple files. We append `/example.mrdi` to the artifact name to specify which file in the artifact is to be loaded.
```

In `Oscar.jl` source files, the artifact string macro is already available and `using LazyArtifacts` is typically not required.

### [Preparing Data (Serialization)](@id data_preparation)

Creating artifacts requires that the corresponding data be serialized locally first. Details are provided in the [Serialization page](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/).

We recommend the use of the `.mrdi` file format for serialization. However, this is not a strict requirement and you may use any file format that you see fit.

### [Hosting Artifacts](@id artifact_hosting)

> Artifacts should be hosted at stable and persistent locations.

Reviewer 3: Maybe rephrase?  `If you want create an artifact, the first decision is where it is to be safely stored: to ensure future accessibility, artifacts should be hosted at stable and persistent locations.

> Artifacts should be hosted at stable and persistent locations.

Author: ```suggestion
If you want create an artifact, the first decision is where it is to be safely stored: to ensure future accessibility, artifacts should be hosted at stable and persistent locations.
```

Preferred options include:

- archival services such as [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/communities/oscar/records?q=&l=list&p=1&s=10&sort=newest), in particular for long-term or publication-related data,
- other stable hosting solutions agreed upon by the maintainers.

For historical reasons, some artifacts are currently hosted via GitHub release assets, for example at

> [Oscar.jl/archive-tag-1](https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/releases/tag/archive-tag-1). This approach should be used with care, as GitHub release assets are not intended to function as a long-term artifact registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Oscar.jl/archive-tag-1](https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/releases/tag/archive-tag-1).
This approach should be used with care, as GitHub release assets are not intended to function as a long-term artifact registry.
```

!!! warning

>     Ensure that existing files are never removed or renamed, as they may be required by older `Oscar.jl` releases.

Reviewer 3: Maybe `...existing artifact files...` ?

Author: ```suggestion
    Ensure that existing artifact files are never removed or renamed, as they may be required by older `Oscar.jl` releases.
```

When debugging, contributors are encouraged to use temporary staging areas before publishing long-term artifact versions. In particular, publication-related Zenodo entries should typically not be cluttered with intermediate or broken artifact versions created during development.

Data intended for querying may also be suitable for [OscarDB](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/Experimental/OscarDB/introduction/).

> ### [Creating and Registering](@id artifact_registration)

Author: ```suggestion
### [Registering](@id artifact_registration)
```

> Creating an artifact typically involves the following steps:

Author: ```suggestion
Recall that creating an artifact typically involves the following steps:
```

- collecting the relevant data files,
- packing these files into a compressed tarball (`.tar.gz`),
- uploading the tarball to a stable hosting location,
- adding a corresponding entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`,
- opening a pull request with the change to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

> Once the change to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` is merged into the `Oscar.jl` repository, the artifact becomes available.

Author: ```suggestion
Registering refers to the final two steps. Once the change to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` is merged into the `Oscar.jl` repository, the artifact becomes available.
```

> - packing these files into a compressed tarball (`.tar.gz`),

Reviewer 3: Does the suffix `.tgz` work too?

Author: I don't know (yet). Ignored for now.

> The [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example) explicitly demonstrates these steps. Additional information is available in [Julia's artifact documentation](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/).

Author: ```suggestion
The [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example) explicitly demonstrates the required changes to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`. Additional information is available in [Julia's artifact documentation](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/).
```

> ### [Using the Artifact](@id artifact_usage)

Reviewer: Isn't this duplicating the earlier `Using the Artifact` section starting around line 103 ?

Author: Indeed, this is on purpose. One case in a concrete end-to-end example, and the other case (where you placed your comment) is about the more general/abstract description.

In fact, all subsections of the end-to-end example have a general/abstract counterpart.

Artifacts can be accessed via Julia's artifact system through the `artifact"..."` string macro. For example:

```julia
using LazyArtifacts

model_data_path = artifact"FTM-1511-03209/1511-03209.mrdi"

model = load(model_data_path)
```

The string passed to `artifact"..."` is determined by the corresponding entry in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

In `Oscar.jl` source files, the artifact string macro is already available and `using LazyArtifacts` is typically not required.

## Updating Artifacts

### General Rules

Artifacts are immutable. Updating an artifact therefore requires:

> - creating a new tarball with the updated data,

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a comment about changing the `-v1` in the name to `-v2` (or whatever)?

> - creating a new tarball with the updated data,

Author: ```suggestion
- creating a new tarball with the updated data (it may be reasonable at append a version tag like `-v1`, `-v2` etc.),
```

> Artifacts are immutable. Updating an artifact therefore requires:

Reviewer: I think this can be very confusing for a user to read. Of course the data behind `artifact"MyExample/example.mrdi"` can *change* (if we update `Artifacts.toml`) and then produce different data, say after an OSCAR update.

So while I get this off-hand remark, I feel it may be rather opaque for someone new to artifacts. Perhaps some time needs to be taken to explain how artifacts actually work, and in particular, what role those checksums play.

Author: Just updated the wording.

> - creating a new tarball with the updated data (it may be reasonable at append a version tag like `-v1`, `-v2` etc.),

Reviewer 3: I suggest rephrasing the parenthetical comment to something like:
```
(we suggest appending a version tag to the artifact name _e.g._ `-v1`, `-v2` _etc._)
```

Author: ```suggestion
- creating a new tarball with the updated data (we suggest appending a version tag to the artifact name _e.g._ `-v1`, `-v2` _etc._),
```

- uploading the tarball to a stable hosting location,
- recomputing the `sha256` and `git-tree-sha1`,
- updating the corresponding entry in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`,
- opening a pull request with the changes to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

Once the pull request is merged, the updated artifact becomes available.

Updating an artifact on a hosting platform alone, for example by uploading a new version to Zenodo, is not sufficient. Any change to the artifact contents changes its hashes and therefore requires a corresponding update of `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

!!! warning
    Any files referenced by the `Oscar.jl` master branch must not be modified, renamed, or deleted, as they may be required by earlier `Oscar.jl` releases.

When repeatedly debugging or refining artifacts, contributors are encouraged to use temporary staging areas before publishing long-term versions. In particular, publication-related Zenodo entries should typically not be cluttered with intermediate or broken artifact versions created during development.

### Serialization Upgrades

> The `.mrdi` file format is under active development and its standard evolves over time. Older files remain compatible with newer OSCAR versions; however, loading older artifacts may require upgrade steps during deserialization. For large artifacts, these upgrades may become time consuming. It is therefore recommended to use the most recent serialization standard when creating artifacts and to periodically upgrade older artifacts if appropriate.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that the chosen file format for serialization may be subject to development. In particular, the `.mrdi` file format, which we recommend for serialization, is under active development. Consequently, its standard evolves over time. Older files remain compatible with newer OSCAR versions; however, loading older artifacts may require upgrade steps during deserialization. For large artifacts, these upgrades may become time consuming. It is therefore recommended to use the most recent serialization standard when creating artifacts and to periodically upgrade older artifacts if appropriate.
```

Additional details are provided in the [Serialization documentation](https://docs.oscar-system.org/stable/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/#Upgrades).

> ## Artifacts in Upstream Dependencies

Author: ```suggestion
## Artifacts in Upstream Dependencies of `Oscar.jl`
```

> ## Artifacts in Upstream Dependencies of `Oscar.jl`

Reviewer 2: maybe mention binarybuilder-distributed binaries here

Author: Isn't this too advanced here?

> ## Artifacts in Upstream Dependencies of `Oscar.jl`

Reviewer: What is the motivation for this section? I.e., what goal does it serve?

Depending on the answer, I'd either remove it; or else also mention Hecke.jl's use of Artifacts

Reviewer 5: Since the whole manual section wants to describe the use of artifacts in Oscar, I had suggested to mention other uses of artifacts than data that were serialized by Oscar.
Somebody interested in using the feature can copy ideas or even code from existing use cases such as the artifacts handling in GAP.jl.
If Hecke.jl provides other such use cases, they may be mentioned as well.

Reviewer 3: >  Somebody interested in using the feature can copy ideas or even code from existing use cases...

Maybe change the subsection title to better indicate its purpose?

Author: ```suggestion
## Places to look for Inspiration: Artifacts in Upstream Dependencies of `Oscar.jl`
```

### GAP.jl

> `GAP.jl` uses artifacts to install [GAP](https://www.gap-system.org/) and GAP packages. Detailed maintainer information is provided in [`GAP.jl/README.maintainer.md`](https://github.com/oscar-system/GAP.jl/blob/master/README.maintainer.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`GAP.jl` uses artifacts to install [GAP](https://www.gap-system.org/) packages. Detailed maintainer information is provided in [`GAP.jl/README.maintainer.md`](https://github.com/oscar-system/GAP.jl/blob/master/README.maintainer.md).
```
GAP itself is bundled via GAP_jll and so only indirectly via artifacts

- [ ] [Registering the Artifact (add an entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` and open a pull request)](@ref artifact_registration)
- [ ] [Using the Artifact (once the pull request has been merged)](@ref artifact_usage)

We illustrate this workflow with an [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example).

### [End-to-End Example](@id end-to-end-artifact-example)

The following example illustrates the complete workflow for creating, registering, and using an artifact in `Oscar.jl`.

#### Serializing the Data

For this example we will use the [`.mrdi` file format to serialize our data](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/).
(You may of course use the file format of your choice.)
Here, the data is the number $2^{10}$.

```julia
using Oscar

obj = ZZ(2)^10

save("example.mrdi", obj)
```

#### Hosting the Data

Create a compressed tarball, for example `example_data_v1.tar.gz`, containing the file `example.mrdi`.

!!! note
    For simplicity, do not introduce an intermediate directory inside the tarball: if multiple files are included, just place them directly in the top level of the archive.

> We host this particular example tarball at [https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example\_data\_v1.tar.gz](https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz). 

Author: ```suggestion
We host this particular example tarball at <https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz>.
```

```@meta
CurrentModule = Oscar
CollapsedDocStrings = true
DocTestSetup = Oscar.doctestsetup()
```

# Artifacts

This page explains what artifacts are, when to use them, and how to work with them in `Oscar.jl`.

## What Artifacts Are and When to Use Them

> Artifacts are content-addressed bundles managed by [Julia's artifact system](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/) and declared in the file `Artifacts.toml`.

Author: ```suggestion
Artifacts are content-addressed bundles managed by [Julia's artifact system](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/) and declared in the file `Artifacts.toml` located in the `Oscar.jl` root directory.
```

- [ ] [Serializing the Data](@ref data_preparation)
- [ ] [Hosting the Data (pack the data into a `gzip` compressed tarball, and upload it to a stable location)](@ref artifact_hosting)
- [ ] [Registering the Artifact (add an entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` and open a pull request)](@ref artifact_registration)
- [ ] [Using the Artifact (once the pull request has been merged)](@ref artifact_usage)

We illustrate this workflow with an [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example).

### [End-to-End Example](@id end-to-end-artifact-example)

The following example illustrates the complete workflow for creating, registering, and using an artifact in `Oscar.jl`.

#### Serializing the Data

For this example we will use the [`.mrdi` file format to serialize our data](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/).
(You may of course use the file format of your choice.)
Here, the data is the number $2^{10}$.

```julia
using Oscar

obj = ZZ(2)^10

save("example.mrdi", obj)
```

#### Hosting the Data

Create a compressed tarball, for example `example_data_v1.tar.gz`, containing the file `example.mrdi`.

!!! note

>     For simplicity, do not introduce an intermediate directory inside the tarball: if multiple files are included, just place them directly in the top level of the archive.

Reviewer 2: There are very good reasons to introduce intermediary directories, so I am still not happy with this. It can help the logical organisation of the files. And if the artifact contains *many* files, it should even be preferred to put them into different directories, as some filesystems don't scale well with directories containing too many individual files (independent of their size).

Reviewer 3: @lgoettgens your supporting argument makes good sense... **BUT** @HereAround made some experiments, and found that there were non-trivial problems when subdirectories were present. The official Julia documentation also rather suggests that their code for handling artifacts is still under development, so maybe they still need to iron out some bugs (at least  on some platforms).

Author: To elaborate a bit more: When I first created an artifact (the QSMDB if I recall correctly), I tried to use sub directories and encountered an error; something like "file not found", but my memory is a bit fuzzy since this has been a long time since and I have not tried to reproduce it now. This I could avoid by not using any sub directory, hence this note.

However, I agree that this limitation looks artificial. Maybe there exists another fix to my error, maybe the interface has changed since...

@lgoettgens please suggest alternative wording that makes you happy. Thank you!

Reviewer 2: If there are still issues with subdirectories in artifacts, this is definitely something worth looking into or reporting upstream. From the 756 artifacts on my system, more than 300 have more than one directory in the top-level of the artifact tarball, with files inside. So this is quite a common use-case of artifacts.
If you ever run into such issues again, please put some steps for reproducing them somewhere on the internet.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I will move a note about subdirectories somewhere else down below.

First, compute the `sha256` and the `git-tree-sha1`:

```julia
using Tar, Inflate, SHA

filename = "/absolute/path/to/example_data_v1.tar.gz"

println("sha256: ", bytes2hex(open(sha256, filename)))
println("git-tree-sha1: ", Tar.tree_hash(IOBuffer(inflate_gzip(filename))))
```

Then add this information, together with the host location, to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

In the case at hand, the corresponding entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` takes the following form:

```toml
[MyExample]
git-tree-sha1 = "ff2f21e623a130f47116d847ae54fd55232b42c1"
lazy = true

    [[MyExample.download]]
    sha256 = "3bd5a20e84b2e579ecde7dc5d7d4606444daf08407eecc9d8e59be1e468ca5a1"
    url = "https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz"
```

You may, of course, replace `MyExample` in the above entry with any other string that you find descriptive.

#### Using the Artifact

The artifact string macro is exported by `LazyArtifacts`. In a standalone Julia session, load it explicitly.

```julia
using LazyArtifacts

obj_path = artifact"MyExample/example.mrdi"

obj = load(obj_path)
```

> Note that an artifact may contain multiple files. We append `/example.mrdi` to the artifact name to specify which file in the artifact is to be loaded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that an artifact may contain multiple files and subdirectories. We append `/example.mrdi` (an absolute path inside the artifact tarball) to the artifact name to specify which file in the artifact is to be loaded.
```
promised note abot subdirectories

[Oscar.jl/archive-tag-1](https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/releases/tag/archive-tag-1).
This approach should be used with care, as GitHub release assets are not intended to function as a long-term artifact registry.

!!! warning
    Ensure that existing artifact files are never removed or renamed, as they may be required by older `Oscar.jl` releases.

When debugging, contributors are encouraged to use temporary staging areas before publishing long-term artifact versions. In particular, publication-related Zenodo entries should typically not be cluttered with intermediate or broken artifact versions created during development.

Data intended for querying may also be suitable for [OscarDB](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/Experimental/OscarDB/introduction/).

### [Registering the Artifact](@id artifact_registration)

Recall that creating an artifact typically involves the following steps:

- collecting the relevant data files,
- packing these files into a compressed tarball (`.tar.gz`),
- uploading the tarball to a stable hosting location,
- adding a corresponding entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`,
- opening a pull request with the change to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

> Registering refers to the final two steps. Once the change to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` is merged into the `Oscar.jl` repository, the artifact becomes available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Registering refers to the final two steps. Once the change to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` is merged into the `Oscar.jl` repository, the artifact becomes publicly available.
```

The [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example) explicitly demonstrates the required changes to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`. Additional information is available in [Julia's artifact documentation](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/).

### [Using the Artifact](@id artifact_usage)

Artifacts can be accessed via Julia's artifact system through the `artifact"..."` string macro. For example:

```julia
using LazyArtifacts

model_data_path = artifact"FTM-1511-03209/1511-03209.mrdi"

model = load(model_data_path)
```

The string passed to `artifact"..."` is determined by the corresponding entry in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

> In `Oscar.jl` source files, the artifact string macro is already available and `using LazyArtifacts` is typically not required.

Reviewer 2: This section seems to be mostly identical to the "Using the artifact" section about 60 lines above in the file. I would understand a double structure in first giving a short example with all steps and then doing everything again but with way more detail. But as it stands right now, that is not the case. Even worse, the above "small example" section contains more information IMO.

If this section here is kept, my comment from https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/pull/5989/changes#r3420788711 should also be applied here.

Author: Agreed. Wording changed and your suggestion applied.

## Updating Artifacts

### General Rules

Artifacts are immutable: To "update" an artifact, you are therefore required to make a new version. Here are the steps to follow:

- create a new tarball with the updated data (we suggest appending a version tag to the artifact name _e.g._ `-v1`, `-v2` _etc._),
- upload the tarball to a stable hosting location,

> - recompute the `sha256` and `git-tree-sha1`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- compute the `sha256` and `git-tree-sha1` of the tarball of the new version,
```

> - update the corresponding entry in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- update the corresponding entry in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` (_i.e._ new filename, and the two new SHA hashes),
```

For this example we will use the [`.mrdi` file format to serialize our data](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/).
(You may of course use the file format of your choice.)
Here, the data is the number $2^{10}$.

```julia
using Oscar

obj = ZZ(2)^10

save("example.mrdi", obj)
```

#### Hosting the Data

Create a compressed tarball, for example `example_data_v1.tar.gz`, containing the file `example.mrdi`.

We host this particular example tarball at <https://martinbies.github.io/Materials/Data/example_data_v1.tar.gz>.

#### Registering the Artifact

Register the artifact by adding an entry to `Artifacts.toml`; see also
[Julia's artifact documentation](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/).
The package [`ArtifactUtils.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaPackaging/ArtifactUtils.jl)
can help automate parts of this workflow. The following text demonstrates the
manual workflow.

First, compute the `sha256` and the `git-tree-sha1`:

```julia
using Tar, Inflate, SHA

filename = "/absolute/path/to/example_data_v1.tar.gz"

println("sha256: ", bytes2hex(open(sha256, filename)))
println("git-tree-sha1: ", Tar.tree_hash(IOBuffer(inflate_gzip(filename))))
```

> Then add this information, together with the host location, to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

Author: ```suggestion
Then add this information, together with the host location, to `Artifacts.toml`.
```

> In the case at hand, the corresponding entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` takes the following form:

Author: ```suggestion
In the case at hand, the corresponding entry to `Artifacts.toml` takes the following form:
```

For historical reasons, some artifacts are currently hosted via GitHub release assets, for example at
[Oscar.jl/archive-tag-1](https://github.com/oscar-system/Oscar.jl/releases/tag/archive-tag-1).
This approach should be used with care, as GitHub release assets are not intended to function as a long-term artifact registry.

!!! warning
    Ensure that existing artifact files are never removed or renamed, as they may be required by older `Oscar.jl` releases.

When debugging, contributors are encouraged to use temporary staging areas before publishing long-term artifact versions. In particular, publication-related Zenodo entries should typically not be cluttered with intermediate or broken artifact versions created during development.

Data intended for querying may also be suitable for [OscarDB](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/Experimental/OscarDB/introduction/).

### [Registering the Artifact](@id artifact_registration)

Recall that creating an artifact typically involves the following steps:

- collecting the relevant data files,
- packing these files into a compressed tarball (`.tar.gz`),
- uploading the tarball to a stable hosting location,

> - adding a corresponding entry to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`,

Author: ```suggestion
- adding a corresponding entry to `Artifacts.toml`,
```

> - opening a pull request with the change to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

Author: ```suggestion
- opening a pull request with the change to `Artifacts.toml`.
```

> Registering refers to the final two steps. Once the change to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` is merged into the `Oscar.jl` repository, the artifact becomes publicly available.

Author: ```suggestion
Registering refers to the final two steps. Once the change to `Artifacts.toml` is merged into the `Oscar.jl` repository, the artifact becomes publicly available.
```

> The [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example) explicitly demonstrates the required changes to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`. Additional information is available in [Julia's artifact documentation](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/).

Author: ```suggestion
The [end-to-end example](@ref end-to-end-artifact-example) explicitly demonstrates the required changes to `Artifacts.toml`. Additional information is available in [Julia's artifact documentation](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/).
```

### [Using the Artifact](@id artifact_usage)

Artifacts can be accessed via Julia's artifact system through the `artifact"..."` string macro. For example:

```julia
using LazyArtifacts

model_data_path = artifact"FTM-1511-03209/1511-03209.mrdi"

model = load(model_data_path)
```

> The string passed to `artifact"..."` is determined by the corresponding entry in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

Author: ```suggestion
The string passed to `artifact"..."` is determined by the corresponding entry in `Artifacts.toml`.
```

In `Oscar.jl` source files, the artifact string macro is already available and `using LazyArtifacts` is typically not required.

## Updating Artifacts

### General Rules

Artifacts are immutable: To "update" an artifact, you are therefore required to make a new version. Here are the steps to follow:

- create a new tarball with the updated data (we suggest appending a version tag to the artifact name _e.g._ `-v1`, `-v2` _etc._),
- upload the tarball to a stable hosting location,
- compute the `sha256` and `git-tree-sha1` of the tarball of the new version,

> - update the corresponding entry in `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml` (_i.e._ new filename, and the two new SHA hashes),

Author: ```suggestion
- update the corresponding entry in `Artifacts.toml` (_i.e._ new filename, and the two new SHA hashes),
```

> - open a pull request with the changes to `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

Author: ```suggestion
- open a pull request with the changes to `Artifacts.toml`.
```

Once the pull request is merged, the updated artifact becomes available.

> Updating an artifact on a hosting platform alone, for example by uploading a new version to Zenodo, is not sufficient. Any change to the artifact contents changes its hashes and therefore requires a corresponding update of `Oscar.jl/Artifacts.toml`.

Author: ```suggestion
Updating an artifact on a hosting platform alone, for example by uploading a new version to Zenodo, is not sufficient. Any change to the artifact contents changes its hashes and therefore requires a corresponding update of `Artifacts.toml`.
```

```@meta
CurrentModule = Oscar
CollapsedDocStrings = true
DocTestSetup = Oscar.doctestsetup()
```

# Artifacts

This page explains what artifacts are, when to use them, and how to work with them in `Oscar.jl`.

## What Artifacts Are and When to Use Them

Artifacts are content-addressed bundles managed by
[Julia's artifact system](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/artifacts/) and declared in the file

> `Artifacts.toml` located in the `Oscar.jl` root directory. Artifacts are automatically downloaded,

Reviewer 3: Maybe `Standard artifacts are automatically...`?  Or perhaps `Normally artifacts are automatically...`?

> `Artifacts.toml` located in the `Oscar.jl` root directory. Artifacts are automatically downloaded,

Author: ```suggestion
`Artifacts.toml` located in the `Oscar.jl` root directory. Normally, artifacts are downloaded automatically,
```

or updated when `Oscar.jl` is installed or updated, unless the required artifact is already present locally.

> 

Reviewer 3: Delete this empty line, so that the following sentence is merged into the paragraph?

> 
> Julia also supports [lazy artifacts](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/LazyArtifacts/), which are
> installed only on demand.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
or updated when `Oscar.jl` is installed or updated, unless the required artifact is already present locally.
Julia also supports [lazy artifacts](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/stdlib/LazyArtifacts/), which are
installed only on demand.

```

> Artifacts allow to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Artifacts allow us to:
```

```julia
using Pkg.Artifacts

obj_path = artifact"MyExample/example.mrdi"

obj = load(obj_path)
```

Note that an artifact may contain multiple files and subdirectories. We append
`/example.mrdi` (an absolute path inside the artifact tarball) to the artifact
name to specify which file in the artifact is to be loaded.

In `Oscar.jl` source files, the artifact string macro is already available and
`using Pkg.Artifacts` is typically not required.

### [Serializing the Data](@id data_preparation)

Creating artifacts requires that the corresponding data be serialized locally first. Details are
provided in the [Serialization page](https://docs.oscar-system.org/dev/DeveloperDocumentation/serialization/).

We recommend the use of the `.mrdi` file format for serialization. However, this is not a strict
requirement and you may use any file format that you see fit.

### [Hosting the Data](@id artifact_hosting)

If you want create an artifact, the first decision is where it is to be safely stored: to ensure future
accessibility, artifacts should be hosted at stable and persistent locations.

Preferred options include:

> 
> - archival services such as [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/communities/oscar/records?q=&l=list&p=1&s=10&sort=newest),

Author: ```suggestion
Preferred options include:
- archival services such as [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/communities/oscar/records?q=&l=list&p=1&s=10&sort=newest),
```

> in particular for long-term or publication-related data,

Reviewer 3: Undesired newline between previous line and this one
